The Baroque is often thought of as a period of artistic style that used exaggerated motion and clear, easily interpreted detail to produce drama, tension,
exuberance, and grandeur in sculpture, painting, architecture, literature, dance, theater, and music. The style began around 1600 in Rome, Italy, and spread
to most of Europe.[1] The popularity and success of the Baroque style was encouraged by the Catholic Church, which had decided at the time of the Council of
Trent, in response to the Protestant Reformation, that the arts should communicate religious themes in direct and emotional involvement.[2] The aristocracy
also saw the dramatic style of Baroque architecture and art as a means of impressing visitors and expressing triumph, power and control. Baroque palaces are
built around an entrance of courts, grand staircases and reception rooms of sequentially increasing opulence. However, "baroque" has resonance and application
that extend beyond a simple reduction to either style or period.[3]

Brooch of an African, Walters Art Museum The French word baroque is derived from the Portuguese word "barroco" or Spanish "barrueco" both of which refer
to a "rough or imperfect pearl", though whether it entered those languages via Latin, Arabic, or some other source is uncertain.[4] It is also yields the
Italian "barocco" and modern Spanish "barroco", German "Barock", Dutch "Barok", and so on. The 1911  Britannica 11th edition thought the term was
derived from the Spanish barrueco, a large, irregularly-shaped pearl, and that it had for a time been confined to the craft of the jeweller.[5] Others
derive it from the mnemonic term "Baroco", a supposedly laboured form of syllogism in logical Scholastica.[6] The Latin root can be found in bis-roca.[7]

In informal usage, the word baroque can simply mean that something is "elaborate", with many details, without reference to the Baroque styles of the 17th
and 18th centuries.

The word "Baroque", like most periodic or stylistic designations, was invented by later critics rather than practitioners of the arts in the 17th and early
18th centuries. It is a French transliteration of the Portuguese phrase "barroca", which means "irregular pearl", and natural pearls that deviate
from the usual, regular forms so they do not have an axis of rotation are known as "baroque pearls".[8]

The term "Baroque" was initially used in a derogatory sense, to underline the excesses of its emphasis. In particular, the term was used to describe its
eccentric redundancy and noisy abundance of details, which sharply contrasted the clear and sober rationality of the Renaissance. Although it was long
thought that the word as a critical term was first applied to architecture, in fact it appears earlier in reference to music, in an anonymous, satirical
review of the  in October 1733 of Jean-Philippe Rameau Hippolyte et Aricie, printed in the Mercure de France in May 1734. The critic implied that
the novelty in this opera was "du barocque", complaining that the music lacked coherent melody, was unsparing with dissonances, constantly changed key and
meter, and speedily ran through every compositional device.[9]

Modern taste and usage[edit]
The Swiss-born art historian, Heinrich Wlfflin,started the rehabilitation of the word Baroque in his Renaissance und Barock (1888); Wlfflin
identified the Baroque as "movement imported into mass", an art antithetic to Renaissance art. He did not make the distinctions between Mannerism and Baroque
that modern writers do, and he ignored the later phase, the academic Baroque that lasted into the 18th century. Long despised, Baroque art and architecture
became fashionable between the two World Wars, and has largely remained in critical favour. For example, the often extreme Sicilian Baroque architecture is
today recognised largely due to the work of Sir Sacheverall Sitwell, whose Southern Baroque Art of 1924 was the first book to appreciate the style, followed
by the more academic work of Anthony Blunt. In painting the gradual rise in popular esteem of Caravaggio has been the best barometer of modern taste.

In art history it has become common to recognise "Baroque" stylistic phases, characterized by energetic movement and display, in earlier art, so that Sir
John Boardman describes the ancient sculpture and His Sons as "one of the finest examples of the Hellenistic baroque",[10] and a later phase of
Imperial Roman sculpture is also often called "Baroque". William Watson describes a late phase of Shang-dynasty Chinese ritual bronzes of the 11th century
BC as "baroque".[11]

The term "Baroque" may still be used, usually pejoratively, describing works of art, craft, or design that are thought to have excessive ornamentation or
complexity of line. Development[edit] eneas Flees Burning Troy, Federico Barocci, 1598
The Baroque originated around 1600, several decades after the Council of Trent (1545–63), by which the Roman Catholic Church answered many questions of
internal reform, addressed the representational arts by demanding that paintings and sculptures in church contexts should speak to the illiterate rather
than to the well-informed. This turn toward a populist conception of the function of ecclesiastical art is seen by many art historians as driving the
innovations of Caravaggio and brothers Agostino and Annibale Carracci, all of whom were working (and competing for commissions) in Rome around 1600.

The appeal of Baroque style turned consciously from the witty, intellectual qualities of 16th-century Mannerist art to a visceral appeal aimed at the senses.
It employed an iconography that was direct, simple, obvious, and theatrical (illustration, right). Baroque art drew on certain broad and heroic tendencies
in Annibale Carracci and his circle, and found inspiration in other artists like Correggio and Caravaggio and Federico Barocci (illustration, right),
nowadays sometimes termed 'proto-Baroque'. Germinal ideas of the Baroque can also be found in the work of Michelangelo. Some general parallels in music make
the expression "Baroque music" useful: there are contrasting phrase lengths, harmony and counterpoint have ousted polyphony, and orchestral color makes a
stronger appearance. Even more generalized parallels perceived by some experts in philosophy, prose style and poetry, are harder to pinpoint.

Though Baroque was superseded in many centers by the Rococo style, beginning in France in the late 1720s, especially for interiors, paintings and the
decorative arts, the Baroque style continued to be used in architecture until the advent of Neoclassicism in the later 18th century. See the Neapolitan
palace of Caserta, a Baroque palace (though in a chaste exterior) whose construction began in 1752.


St. Nicholas Church in Lesser Town in Prague was founded in 1703 under lead of Baroque architect Christoph Dientzenhofer.
In paintings Baroque gestures are broader than Mannerist gestures: less ambiguous, less arcane and mysterious, more like the stage gestures of opera,
a major Baroque art form. Baroque poses depend on contrapposto ("counterpoise"), the tension within the figures that move the planes of shoulders and
hips in counterdirections. See Bernini's David.

The dryer, less dramatic and coloristic, chastened later stages of 18th century Baroque architectural style are often seen as a separate Late Baroque
manifestation, for example in buildings by Claude Perrault. Academic characteristics in the neo-Palladian style, epitomized by William Kent, are a parallel
development in Britain and the British colonies: within interiors, Kent's furniture designs are vividly influenced by the Baroque furniture of Rome and
Genoa, hierarchical tectonic sculptural elements, meant never to be moved from their positions, completed the wall decoration. Baroque is a style of
unity imposed upon rich, heavy detail.

The Baroque was defined by Heinrich Wölfflin as the age where the oval replaced the circle as the center of composition, that centralization replaced
balance, and that coloristic and "painterly" effects began to become more prominent. Art historians, often Protestant ones, have traditionally emphasized
that the Baroque style evolved during a time in which the Roman Catholic Church had to react against the many revolutionary cultural movements that
produced a new science and new forms of religion—Reformation. It has been said that the monumental Baroque is a style that could give the Papacy, like
secular absolute monarchies, a formal, imposing way of expression that could restore its prestige, at the point of becoming somehow symbolic of the
Counter-Reformation.

Whether this is the case or not, it was successfully developed in Rome, where Baroque architecture widely renewed the central areas with perhaps the
most important urbanistic revision.

A defining statement of what Baroque signifies in painting is provided by the series of paintings executed by Peter Paul Rubens for Marie de Medici at
the Luxembourg Palace in Paris (now at the Louvre),[15] in which a Catholic painter satisfied a Catholic patron: Baroque-era conceptions of monarchy,
iconography, handling of paint, and compositions as well as the depiction of space and movement.

Baroque style featured "exaggerated lighting, intense emotions, release from restraint, and even a kind of artistic sensationalism". Baroque art did not
really depict the life style of the people at that time; however, "closely tied to the Counter-Reformation, this style melodramatically reaffirmed the
emotional depths of the Catholic faith and glorified both church and monarchy" of their power and influence.[16]

There were highly diverse strands of Italian baroque painting, from Caravaggio to Cortona; both approaching emotive dynamism with different styles. The
most prominent Spanish painter of the Baroque was Diego Velázquez.[17]

Another frequently cited work of Baroque art is Bernini's Saint Theresa in Ecstasy for the Cornaro chapel in Saint Maria della Vittoria, which brings
together architecture, sculpture, and theatre into one grand conceit.[18] Still-life, by Josefa de Óbidos, c. 1679, Santarém, Portugal, Municipal Library
The later Baroque style gradually gave way to a more decorative Rococo.

A rather different art developed out of northern realist traditions in 17th century Dutch Golden Age painting, which had very little religious art, and
little history painting, instead playing a crucial part in developing secular genres such as still life, genre paintings of everyday scenes, and landscape
painting. While the Baroque nature of Rembrandt's art is clear, the label is less often used for Vermeer and many other Dutch artists. Flemish Baroque
painting shared a part in this trend, while also continuing to produce the traditional categories.

In a similar way the French classical style of painting exemplified by Poussin is often classed as Baroque, and does share many qualities of the Italian
painting of the same period, although the poise and restraint derived from following classical ideas typically give it a very different overall mood.

Stanislaus Kostka on his deathbed by Pierre Le Gros the Younger In Baroque sculpture, groups of figures assumed new importance and there was a dynamic
movement and energy of human forms—they spiraled around an empty central vortex, or reached outwards into the surrounding space. For the first time,
Baroque sculpture often had multiple ideal viewing angles. The characteristic Baroque sculpture added extra-sculptural elements, for example, concealed
lighting, or water fountains. Aleijadinho in Brazil was also one of the great names of baroque sculpture, and his master work is the set of statues of
the Santuário de Bom Jesus de Matosinhos in Congonhas. The soapstone sculptures of old testament prophets around the terrace are considered amongst his
finest work.

The architecture, sculpture and fountains of Bernini (1598–1680) give highly charged characteristics of Baroque style. Bernini was undoubtedly the most
important sculptor of the Baroque period. He approached Michelangelo in his omnicompetence: Bernini sculpted, worked as an architect, painted, wrote plays,
and staged spectacles. In the late 20th century Bernini was most valued for his sculpture, both for his virtuosity in carving marble and his ability to
create figures that combine the physical and the spiritual. He was also a fine sculptor of bust portraits in high demand among the powerful.

Bernini's Cornaro chapel[edit]
A good example of Bernini's Baroque work is his St. Theresa in Ecstasy (1645–52), created for the Cornaro Chapel of the church of Santa Maria della
Vittoria, Rome. Bernini designed the entire chapel, a subsidiary space along the side of the church, for the Cornaro family.


Bernini's Ecstasy of St. Teresa
Saint Theresa, the focal point of the chapel, is a soft white marble statue surrounded by a polychromatic marble architectural framing. This structure
conceals a window which lights the statue from above. Figure-groups of the Cornaro family sculpted in shallow relief inhabit opera boxes on the two side
walls of the chapel. The setting places the viewer as a spectator in front of the statue with the Cornaro family leaning out of their box seats and
craning forward to see the mystical ecstasy of the saint.

St. Theresa is highly idealized and in an imaginary setting. She was a popular saint of the Catholic Reformation. She wrote of her mystical experiences
for an audience of the nuns of her Carmelite Order; these writings had become popular reading among lay people interested in spirituality. In her writings,
she described the love of God as piercing her heart like a burning arrow. Bernini materializes this by placing St. Theresa on a butt while a Cupid
figure holds a golden arrow made of metal and smiles down at her. The angelic figure is not preparing to plunge the arrow into her heart—rather, he
has withdrawn it. St. Theresa's face reflects not the anticipation of ecstasy, but her current fulfillment.

This work is widely considered a masterpiece of the Baroque, although the mix of religious and erotic imagery (faithful to St Teresa's own written
account) may raise modern eyebrows. However, Bernini was a devout Catholic and was not attempting to satirize the experience of a chaste nun. Rather,
he aimed to portray religious experience as an intensely physical one. Theresa described her bodily reaction to spiritual enlightenment in a language
of ecstasy used by many mystics, and Bernini's depiction is earnest.

The Cornaro family promotes itself discreetly in this chapel; they are represented visually, but are placed on the sides of the chapel, witnessing
the event from balconies. As in an opera house, the Cornaro have a privileged position in respect to the viewer, in their private reserve, closer to
the saint; the viewer, however, has a better view from the front. They attach their name to the chapel, but St. Theresa is the focus. It is a private
chapel in the sense that no one could say mass on the altar beneath the statue (in the 17th century and probably through the 19th) without permission
from the family, but the only thing that divides the viewer from the image is the altar rail. The spectacle functions both as a demonstration of mysticism
and as a piece of family pride.

Architecture[edit]
The main altar of St. John's Co-Cathedral, Malta
Main article: Baroque architecture
In Baroque architecture, new emphasis was placed on bold massing, colonnades, domes, light-and-shade (chiaroscuro), 'painterly' color effects, and the
bold play of volume and void. In interiors, Baroque movement around and through a void informed monumental staircases that had no parallel in previous
architecture. The other Baroque innovation in worldly interiors was the state apartment, a sequence of increasingly rich interiors that culminated in a
presence chamber or throne room or a state bedroom. The sequence of monumental stairs followed by a state apartment was copied in smaller scale everywhere
in aristocratic dwellings of any pretensions.